Improve AppDefinition documentation (#1320)
counterfactual/monorepo: packages/specs/source/01-app-definition.md

An App is, quite simply, a well-defined blockchain-native application that can be used within the contexts of a state channel. It has the following properties at a minimum:

- A fixed set of participants / users
- An encoding type for its state
- A resolution function based on the state

The most basic type of App is a 2-person ETH payment channel. In that case we have:

- Alice and Bob as the users
- An encoding type of `tuple(address alice, address bob, uint256 aBal, uint256 bBal)`[†](#faq)
- The resolution function sends `aBal` Wei to `alice` and sends `bBal` Wei to `bob` `bBal`

A slightly more complicated example would be a Tic-Tac-Toe game:

- Alice and Bob are the users, Alice is X and Bob is O
- An encoding type of `tuple(uint8[9] board, address playerX, address playerO)`
- Sends `playerX` the maximimum amount if X won, or `playerO` if O won, or splits the amount in half if a draw

> There is, of course, an important difference in the example of a Tic-Tac-Toe game though. That difference is that in the Tic-Tac-Toe game, the final resolution of the state of the application is not one-to-one with the current state of the application. In the payment channel example, if one user were to become unresponsive it is is easy to see how the resolution would play out; Alice would receive `aBal` and Bob would receive `bBal`. In Tic-Tac-Toe, however, if the game is not finished yet, there are some moves left to be made to reach a "terminal" state which can then be resolved; X having won, O having won, or a draw to be specific.

Reviewer: use of "one-to-one" is incorrect here; the resolution is not defined

Reviewer: dangling modifier after the semicolon

> To express this important difference we introduce some additional properties that can be implemented for a state channels based application:

Reviewer: "property" is not defined

- A function which defines how state can "progress" given an action
- A function to define whether an action can be legally taken by a participant
- A function to determine is a state is indeed one that could be considered "terminal"

For Tic-Tac-Toe then these can be simply expressed as:

- Allowed actions are to place an X on the board or place an O on the board
- `playerX` may place an X if it is X's turn based on the `board` state (and vice versa)
- The state is "terminal" if there are 3 in a row of X's or O's on the board or the board is full

> In the next few sections, we define how in Counterfactual we define, resolve, and progress state in general.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next sections, we define how in Counterfactual we define, resolve, and progress state.
```

## Defining State

> A state channel is fundamentally about progressing a single state object. Therefore, in the Counterfactual framework, we center everything around a single `bytes` object. For the sake of performing computation on this object (e.g., evalutating if there is a row of X's on a Tic-Tac-Toe board) then we encode it using the ABI specification that the Solidity programming language offers full support for. In Solidity particular, we use the built-in `ABIEncoderV2` language feature which allows for developers to define their state structures using a `struct` definition and encode and decode these objects as needed. For example, in our payment channel from above we might have the following object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A state channel is fundamentally about progressing a single state object. Therefore, in the Counterfactual framework, we center everything around a single `bytes` object. For the sake of performing computation on this object (e.g., evaluating if there is a row of X's on a Tic-Tac-Toe board) we interpret it as an ABI-encoded value of a specific type using the built-in `ABIEncoderV2` language feature. THIS allows developers to define their state structures using a `struct` definition and encode and decode these objects as needed. For example, in our payment channel from above we might have the following object:
```

```solidity
struct ETHPaymentChannelState {
  address alice;
  address bob;
  uint256 aBal;
  uint256 bBal;
}
```

## Progressing State

> As it has been mentioned before, some kinds of applications require there be a way of progressing some state to a "terminal" state through a series of allowed actions. In these cases, we adopt the model of a state machine that is described via logical states and allowed actions which act as edges between logical states; a "terminal" state is simply one from which there does not exist any outgoing edge (i.e., an "allowed action").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As has been mentioned before, some kinds of applications require a way of progressing some state to a "terminal" state through a series of allowed actions. In these cases, we adopt the model of a state machine that consists of logical states and allowed actions (transitions between states); a "terminal" state is simply one from which there does not exist any outgoing edge (i.e., an "allowed action").
```

Reviewer: what is a `logical` state?

> In Counterfactual, if an action wishes to allow its state to be unilaterally progressable, we require the definition of a function that **applies an action to a state to produce a new state** _in addition to_ **a function that determines if an action can be legally taken by a particular turn taker**. As you will see in the [adjudication layer](./02-adjudication-layer.md) section of these specifications, these functions are important in handling on-chain challenge scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Counterfactual, if an action wishes to allow its state to be unilaterally progressable, we require the definition of a function that **applies an action to a state to produce a new state** _in addition to_ **a function that determines if an action can be taken by a particular turn taker**. As you will see in the [adjudication layer](./02-adjudication-layer.md) section of these specifications, these functions are important in handling on-chain challenge scenarios.
```

The ultimate purpose of these functions is to ensure the following:

- It should always be extremely explicit what the exact rules of the state channel application that all parties are abiding by are
- There should always be a single logical turn taker for any given state ([concurrent state updates](#concurrent-state-updates) are disallowed)

> - It should be possible, in the strictly least number of on-chain transactions, use the adjudication layer to fairly resolve a state channel application (without unnecessary gas expenditure)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It should be possible, in the least number of on-chain transactions, use the adjudication layer to fairly resolve a state channel application (without unnecessary gas expenditure)
```

Here is a helpful diagram for visualizing the nature of such an `applyAction` function:

![](img/applyAction.svg)

## Resolving State

> For any given state channel application is the notion of a resolution. This is a critical concept usually because the resolution can be tied to interesting economic parameters that create the incentives for the behaviour of users in the application to begin with. For example, users will remain online and play a game of Tic-Tac-Toe because they know the rules of the game are deciding who will take home some financial reward. In the Counterfactual framework, this reward is defined in terms of an internal transaction that is executed by the multisignature wallet that is the holder of the state deposits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A state channel application defines a resolution. This is a critical concept usually because the resolution can be tied to interesting economic parameters that create the incentives for the behaviour of users in the application to begin with. For example, users will remain online and play a game of Tic-Tac-Toe because they know the rules of the game are deciding who will take home some financial reward. In the Counterfactual framework, this reward is defined in terms of an internal transaction that is executed by the multisignature wallet that is the holder of the state deposits.
```

Reviewer: ambiguous modifier "usually"

When writing a state channel application presently, we require that the resolution of an application be directly tied one-to-one to some particular state that is being progressed. For example, when defining a game of Tic-Tac-Toe, we ask that the resolution function which checks for the winner specifically return a data structure that can be interpretted for sending ETH to the user that won.

Here is a diagram that shows how a resolution looks presently for a game of Tic-Tac-Toe:

![](img/resolve.svg)

**Note:** This is subject to an improvement that will be added soon that will de-couple an application from the exact transaction that occurs upon resolution to an interpreter pattern that will allow for multiple assets to be re-used on the same state machine logic. For example, a Tic-Tac-Toe game either returns a full-amount for one person or divides an amount in half; those are the only two options. These two options can be mapped to ETH, ERC20 tokens, or other assets which are fungible in single or half quantities.

## AppDefinition

> To address all of the above requirements of state channel applications, we introduce an interface called an `AppDefinition` which **implements the logic of an application in the EVM**. To be specific, the `AppDefinition` interface is one which can be implemented by a developer that is interested in writing a state channels based application that the Counterfactual project supports in the rest of the framework (e.g., in the [adjudication layer](./02-adjudication-layer.md)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address all of the above requirements of state channel applications, we introduce an interface called an `AppDefinition` which **implements the logic of an application in the EVM**. The `AppDefinition` interface is implemented by a developer interested in writing a state channels based application that the Counterfactual project supports in the rest of the framework (e.g., in the [adjudication layer](./02-adjudication-layer.md)).
```

### Resolution Function

> There is a single function which _must_ be implemented in the interface. This function is essentially providing the resolution functionality discussed above. The function signature looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a single function which _must_ be implemented in the interface. This function provides the resolution functionality discussed above. The function signature is:
```

```solidity
function resolve(bytes memory, Transfer.Terms memory) public view returns (Transfer.Transaction);
```

> The first argument which is of type `bytes memory` is an internally-referencable state object for the `AppDefinition`. For example, in the case of a payment channel it must be considered as the ABI-encoded version of a structure encoding the type from above. This means that you will likely want to use `abi.decode` inside of the `resolve` method to decode the bytes into a usable struct object. In our payment channel example this would look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first argument of type `bytes memory` is an internally-referencable state object for the `AppDefinition`. For example, in the case of a payment channel it must be considered as the ABI-encoded version of a structure encoding the type from above. This means that you will likely want to use `abi.decode` inside of the `resolve` method to decode the bytes into a usable struct object. In our payment channel example this would look like:
```

```solidity
function resolve(bytes memory encodedState, Transfer.Terms memory terms)
  public
  view
  returns (Transfer.Transaction)
{
  AppState state = abi.decode(encodedState, (ETHPaymentChannelState));
  // state.aBal, state.bBal, state.alice, state.bob
}
```

> **NOTE**: The `Transfer.Terms` argument and required return type `Transfer.Transaction`, although necessary at the moment, are being changed in a pull request to be merged very shortly from the time of this writing ([#1263](https://github.com/counterfactual/monorepo/pull/1263)) so the descriptions are omitted from this document for now.

In addition to the `resolve` method, the `AppDefinition` interface also allows for the optional definition of the following methods which can either all be implemented or none implemented.

### Turn Taking Function

> To be able to identify who is uniquely allowed to progress from one state to the next, a turn taking function can be implemented which returns the specific address that is expected to have signed a particular state update. It accepts two arguments: the state of the application and the array of all signing keys that have been allocated to the application. Therefore, the function must return the key in the array of signing keys that it expects to sign an update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To identify who is uniquely allowed to progress from one state to the next, a turn taking function can be implemented which returns the specific address that is expected to have signed a particular state update. It accepts two arguments: the state of the application and the array of all signing keys that have been allocated to the application. Therefore, the function must return the key in the array of signing keys that it expects to sign an update.
```

```solidity
function getTurnTaker(bytes memory, address[] memory) public pure returns (address);
```

In our Tic-Tac-Toe example, this function would return the 0th-indexed key for player X and the key at index 1 for player O.

### Terminal State Flag Function

As an efficiency gain in cases where the adjudication layer is needed, a function can be defined which declares whether or not a state can no longer be progressed. This function takes a single argument: the state of the application. It is expected to return `true` if the state is terminal or `false` if it is not.

```solidity
function isStateTerminal(bytes memory) public pure returns (bool);
```

In Tic-Tac-Toe, the state is terminal if the game has been won or the board is full.

### Action Application Function

> Finally, the most critical function for progressing state is the `applyAction` function which as described above takes some encoded state and an encoded action and is expected to return a new encoded state object. The [encoding and decoding](#abiencoderv2) functionality provided in Solidity are helpful here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the most critical function for progressing state is the `applyAction` function which as described above takes some encoded state and an encoded action and returns a new encoded state object. The [encoding and decoding](#abiencoderv2) functionality provided in Solidity are helpful here.
```
